Windows:
---------

Archiving files with Powershell

Now you'll build multiple files into a .zip archive using Powershell. Open Powershell and navigate to this folder. (Make sure you have administrative privileges enabled!). So, search the Start Menu for Powershell, right-click it, and select "Run as Administrator". Use the command

cd C:\Users\Qwiklab\Documents\

to navigate to the "Documents" folder. Once you're there, you can create a .zip archive (called Planets.zip) using this command:

Compress-Archive -Path Earth, Mercury, Venus Planets.zip

Install and uninstall software using Windows CLI

Installing VLC

There are alternatives to manually downloading and running installers when you need to install or manage programs on Windows. Chocolatey is a super convenient command-line tool for managing your installed applications, that can be used in the Powershell terminal. It hasn't been pre-installed on your virtual machine windows-instance, so you'll need to add it yourself. To install or remove programs, you need administrative privileges. So, open Powershell by searching for it in the Windows start menu, then right-click it and select "Run as Administrator".

Head's up: Some of the commands using Chocolatey print output that looks like an error message. This is usually ok, and you can proceed anyway. To avoid having this displayed, you can enter this command in your Powershell terminal:

$ErrorActionPreference= 'silentlycontinue'

Installing Chocolatey

In your open Powershell terminal, you first need to register the Chocolatey package with Powershell. Your machine may currently have it registered incorrectly, so unregister it with this command (if you see an error, it means that it is not registered):

Unregister-PackageSource -Name chocolatey

Then you can re-register Chocolatey, so that it can be installed using this command (one line):

Register-PackageSource -Name chocolatey -ProviderName Chocolatey -Location http://chocolatey.org/api/v2/

You'll need to enter "Y" for "Yes" when prompted to confirm the operation.

Using Chocolatey to install VLC

Now you can use Chocolatey to install VLC (a media player) using the following command, and bypassing the need to find and download an installer manually:

Install-Package -Name vlc -Source chocolatey

You'll be prompted to confirm the installation midway through the process. To do this, enter "A" (for "All") to accept all prompts at once.

You can verify that VLC has successfully been installed with this command:

Get-Package -Name vlc

Uninstalling GIMP

You can also use Chocolatey to uninstall programs, too. If you've closed your Powershell window, reopen it again by searching for it in the Start Menu, then right-clicking it and selecting "Run as Administrator".

You can use uninstall GIMP, a photo editor, using this command:

Choco Uninstall GIMP

You'll be prompted to confirm your choice again by typing "Y" (for "Yes"). Once the process finishes, GIMP will no longer be installed on your system. You can verify this with the following command and seeing that GIMP is not listed

Get-Package

Linux:
-------

Installing Atom

First, use dpkg to install a text editor, called Atom. A .deb file is located at "/home/qwiklab/downloads/atom-amd64.deb", which you can install using this command:

sudo dpkg -i /home/qwiklab/downloads/atom-amd64.deb

You'll see some errors after this command, but that's okay! The atom package has some dependencies that aren't installed on your machine yet, and dpkg is just warning you that they need to be installed:

You can remedy this by using apt to fix the missing dependencies, using this command:

sudo apt install -f

You'll be prompted to confirm your decision to continue with the operation by typing "Y" (for "Yes"), midway through the process.

Now Atom is successfully installed, which you can verify using dpkg:

dpkg -s atom

Extracting an archive

Next, you will extract a .tar archive. The archive "extract_me.tar" is located in "/home/qwiklab/downloads/". Move to that directory, using this command:

cd /home/qwiklab/downloads

You can use the Linux tar command to extract it using this command:

sudo tar -xvf extract_me.tar

The contents of the archive (the file named "great_job") are then extracted:

Archiving files

First, move back to the original directory:

cd ~

You can also use the tar command to do the reverse operation, creating an archive. There are three files in your /home/qwiklab/documents folder named "Earth", "Mercury", and "Venus". Use tar to archive them into the file "Planets.tar" using this command (one line):

tar -cvf Planets.tar /home/qwiklab/documents/Earth /home/qwiklab/documents/Mercury /home/qwiklab/documents/Venus

"Planets.tar" will then be added to your current directory, and will contain the three planet files:

Installing 7-Zip

You can also install programs on Linux, using apt too, which handles dependencies for you to simplify the installation process. You can install the program 7-Zip, using apt, with a simple one-line command:

sudo apt install p7zip-full

When it's finished, 7-Zip will be installed:

You can verify the installation using dpkg, with this command:

dpkg -s p7zip-full

Uninstalling GIMP

Uninstallation can also be handled by apt by using "remove" instead of "install" as the argument. GIMP, an image-editing program, is already installed on your machine. Uninstall it now, using apt with this command:

sudo apt remove gimp

You'll be prompted to confirm your decision midway through the uninstallation process. Confirm this by typing "Y" (for "Yes"). Then, GIMP will be uninstalled:

You can verify this using dpkg (like before) with this command:

dpkg -s gimp